Thanks for downloading this release of FreeSCI!

This is an early development version. Please do not confuse this with a
working SCI engine.

The FreeSCI distribution currently consists of tools and libraries to allow
the platform-independant usage of SCI resource files. The current goal is
to build an SCI virtual machine which is capable of running at least the
older SCI0 games (like Space Quest 3, King's Quest 4 or Leisure Suit Larry 2
((C) Sierra On-Line, Inc.)) In this process, support for the various
SCI resources will be built and improved, as well as tested. Feel free to
contribute in any way you wish, be it source code, documentation, or bug
reports.

Please refer to 'NEWS' and the 'ChangeLog' for information about changes
in this and previous versions.

To build the package, type the following:

configure
make

Required 'non-standard' libraries:
 * glib

GGI (http://www.ggi-project.org) is required for the demos, and generally
for graphics display.

GSI (http://www.xs4all.nl/~whs/gsi/gsi.html) is required for sound support.
The sound stuff should build without it, though; of course, only MIDI data
/generation/ will work without gsi.

libpng (http://www.cdrom.com/pub/png/) is required if you want to be able to
store images as .png files. It will not become a necessity for the complete
FreeSCI engine.

Successful builds have been reported for the following platforms:
- i686-pc-linux-gnu
- sparc-sun-solaris2.5
- DEC Alpha running Linux

For a list of what's left to be done, please refer to the web site at: 
http://freesci.linuxgames.com


Please note that most of the documentation found in the doc/misc subdirectory
is random information copied from the SCI Decoding Project homepage and
from homepages of various of its members.
Some of the source code contained in the doc/ directory, namely sd.c, sde.c,
sdv.c, script.java and decrypt.c, was created by Carl Muckenhoupt who has
given permission for it or parts of it to be ported and/or included in this
distribution.
Other source code, such as scr000.txt and scr_code.cpp, was copied from public
sources without the knowledge of its authors.

In order to do something useful, you need all of the resource files of any
SCI0 game in your current working directory before running one of the programs
from this package. These resource files and everything they contain are
property and copyrighted by Sierra On-Line (which in turn is a trademark
of Sierra On-Line, Inc.).
"Space Quest 3: The Pirates of Pestulon" and "Quest for Glory 1: So You Want
To Be A Hero" are trademarks of Sierra On-Line, Inc.

